>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 24: NEW
ARRESTS IN THE BERLIN CHRISTMAS
MARKET ATTACK; IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, THIS STAGE PRODUCTION
GIVES OTHELLO THE HIP-HOP
TREATMENT; AND AN UNLIKELY STORY
OF GENTRIFICATION IN PORTLAND,
OREGON.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THERE HAVE BEEN NEW ARRESTS IN
THIS WEEK'S BERLIN CHRISTMAS
MARKET TRUCK ATTACK THAT KILLED
12 PEOPLE AND INJURED 56 OTHERS.
TODAY, POLICE IN TUNISIA
ARRESTED THE NEPHEW OF ACCUSED
ATTACKER ANIS AMRI AND TWO OTHER
SUSPECTED MILITANTS.
TUNISIA'S INTERIOR MINISTRY SAYS
AMRI'S 18-YEAR-OLD NEPHEW HAD
CONTACT WITH AMRI THROUGH AN
ENCRYPTED MESSAGING APP.
ALL THREE ARE SUSPECTED OF
BELONGING TO THE SAME TERRORIST
CELL AND HAVING CONTACTS WITH
THE ACCUSED TERRORIST.
THE MINISTRY SAYS AMRI, WHO HAD
PLEDGED HIS ALLEGIANCE TO THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP IN A VIDEO,
WAS RECRUITING HIS NEPHEW TO
JOIN HIM IN EUROPE.
ALL THREE ARE BEING HELD IN
DETENTION PENDING FURTHER
INVESTIGATION.
IT'S UNCLEAR WHETHER THE
SUSPECTS ASSISTED AMRI IN
FLEEING BERLIN AFTER THE ATTACK.
AMRI WAS KILLED EARLY FRIDAY IN
A SHOOTOUT WITH POLICE IN A
SUBURB OF MILAN, ITALY.
IN SYRIA THIS WEEKEND, CIVILIANS
ARE RETURNING TO NEIGHBORHOODS
IN EASTERN ALEPPO FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN NEARLY FIVE YEARS.
THE SYRIAN ARMY SAYS IT HAS
COMPLETELY RETAKEN ALEPPO AND
BROUGHT "SECURITY AND SAFETY" TO
THE HEAVILY DAMAGED CITY.
AFTER DAYS OF CALM, SYRIAN STATE
TV REPORTED THAT AIR STRIKES IN
REBEL-HELD AREAS NEAR ALEPPO HAD
RESUMED, KILLING AT LEAST FIVE
PEOPLE.
AND INSIDE ALEPPO, AN EXPLOSIVE
DEVICE LEFT BEHIND BY REBELS
INJURED AT LEAST THREE PEOPLE.
ON THURSDAY, THE LAST GROUP OF
REBEL FIGHTERS WERE EVACUATED TO
OPPOSITION HELD AREAS OUTSIDE OF
THE CITY.
UNDER A DEAL BROKERED BY TURKEY
AND RUSSIA, CONVOYS OF BUSSES
AND CARS HAVE TAKEN BOTH
CIVILIANS AND REBEL FIGHTERS OUT
OF THE CITY SINCE LATE LAST
WEEK.
IN NIGERIA, THE PRESIDENT
CLAIMED TODAY THAT THE BOKO
HARAM MILITANT GROUP HAS BEEN
DRIVEN FROM ITS LAST BASE IN THE
MASSIVE SAMBISA FOREST.
IN A STATEMENT POSTED ON SOCIAL
MEDIA, PRESIDENT MUHAMMADU
BUHARI SAID THE GROUP WAS "ON
THE RUN AND NO LONGER HAVE A
PLACE TO HIDE."
BUT THE THREAT IS FAR FROM OVER,
WITH REPORTS THAT THE MILITANTS
ARE REGROUPING AT OTHER BASES IN
NIGERIA.
ONE FACTION OF BOKO HARAM IS
ALLIED WITH THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THE SAMBISA FOREST ENCLAVE IS
WHERE BOKO HARAM WAS BELIEVED TO
BE HOLDING SOME OF THE MORE THAN
200 SCHOOLGIRLS KIDNAPPED IN
2014 FROM THE TOWN OF CHIBOK.
MOST OF THE GIRLS REMAIN
MISSING.
DESPITE COMMITMENTS TO THE
LATEST TRUCE BY THE REBELS AND
LEADERS OF UKRAINE AND RUSSIA, A
NEW CEASE-FIRE THAT WAS TO HAVE
TAKEN EFFECT LAST NIGHT AT
MIDNIGHT IN TIME FOR CHRISTMAS
HAS NOT TAKEN HOLD.
THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT AND
RUSSIA-BACKED SEPARATIST REBELS
BOTH ALLEGE MULTIPLE VIOLATIONS
OF THE TRUCE.
THE REBELS CLAIM UKRAINIAN
TROOPS SHELLED THEM AT LEAST 140
TIMES.
THE CONFLICT THAT BEGAN MORE
THAN TWO YEARS AGO WHEN RUSSIA
ANNEXED CRIMEA HAS CLAIMED
ALMOST 10,000 LIVES.
A NUMBER OF OPPOSITION LAWMAKERS
IN POLAND WON'T BE HOME FOR THE
HOLIDAYS.
THEY'VE TAKEN UP TEMPORARY
RESIDENCE IN THE EMPTY
PARLIAMENT BUILDING IN WARSAW
AND PLAN TO STAY THERE UNTIL
PARLIAMENT RETURNS JANUARY 11.
THE SIT-IN IS TO PROTEST MOVES
BY POLAND'S RULING POPULIST LAW
AND JUSTICE PARTY WHICH HAS
RECENTLY TRIED TO LIMIT CERTAIN
PRESS FREEDOMS AND WEAKEN THE
CONSTITUTIONAL TRIBUNAL.
ONE PROTESTER SAID THE
GOVERNMENT IS TRYING, IN HIS
WORDS, "TO BUILD A KIND OF
VELVET DICTATORSHIP, STEP BY
STEP."
CHRISTMAS EVE CELEBRATIONS ARE
WELL UNDER WAY IN THE HOLY LAND,
WHERE THOUSANDS OF PILGRIMS AND
TOURISTS GATHERED IN BETHLEHEM'S
MANGER SQUARE.
THE TOP ROMAN CATHOLIC CLERIC IN
THE REGION ARRIVED FROM
JERUSALEM TO CELEBRATE MIDNIGHT
MASS INSIDE THE FOURTH CENTURY
CHURCH OF THE NATIVITY, THE
TRADITIONAL BIRTHPLACE OF JESUS.
THE OBAMAS TEAMED UP TODAY TO
DELIVER THEIR FINAL CHRISTMAS
MESSAGE FROM THE WHITE HOUSE IN
THEIR WEEKLY ADDRESS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID THE
GREATEST GIFT HE AND MICHELLE
OBAMA HAVE RECEIVED HAS BEEN
"THE HONOR OF SERVING AS YOUR
PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY."
THEY SAID THAT TOMORROW, THEY
WILL CELEBRATE THE HOLIDAY FOR
THE LAST TIME AS FIRST FAMILY
AND REMEMBER THE ETERNAL MESSAGE
OF LOVE, COMPASSION AND HOPE.
>> THE IDEA THAT WE ARE OUR
BROTHER'S KEEPER AND OUR
SISTER'S KEEPER, THAT WE SHOULD
TREAT OTHERS AS WE WOULD WANT TO
BE TREATED, THAT WE CARE FOR THE
SICK, FEED THE HUNGRY,
WELCOME THE STRANGER NO MATTER
WHERE THEY COME FROM OR HOW THEY
PRACTICE THEIR FAITH.
>> THOSE ARE VALUES THAT HELP
GUIDE NOT JUST MY FAMILY'S
CHRISTIAN FAITH, BUT THAT OF
JEWISH AMERICANS AND MUSLIM
AMERICANS; NONBELIEVERS AND
AMERICANS OF ALL BACKGROUNDS.
AND NO ONE BETTER EMBODIES THAT
SPIRIT OF SERVICE THAN THE MEN
AND WOMEN WHO WEAR OUR COUNTRY'S
UNIFORM AND THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Sreenivasan: READ SOME FACTS
ABOUT REINDEER THAT MIGHT
SURPRISE YOU.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BROADWAY
SMASH HIT "HAMILTON" HAS DRAWN
IN THOUSANDS OF AUDIENCE MEMBERS
WITH ITS BLEND OF HIP-HOP AND
AMERICAN HISTORY, BUT "HAMILTON"
IS FAR FROM THE ONLY PLAY TO
FUSE HIP-HOP AND MUSICAL
THEATER.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO VENTURED A FEW BLOCKS
AWAY FROM WHERE "HAMILTON" IS
PLAYING IN NEW YORK TO THE OFF-
BROADWAY WESTSIDE THEATRE.
>> ♪ I NEVER KNEW MY POPS,
MOMS WAS A JUNKY
♪ RAISED IN THE STREETS
WITH THE BEATS THAT ARE FUNKY
♪ CONCRETE AND METAL
A CHILD OF THE GHETTO
♪ LOOKIN' FOR THE LOOT
BUT THERE WAS NONE FOR OTHELLO.
>> Reporter: IN THEIR PRODUCTION
OF "OTHELLO: THE REMIX," RAP AND
THEATER ARTISTS, THE Q BROTHERS,
RE-IMAGINE THE CLASSIC WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE PLAY FOR A MODERN
HIP-HOP AUDIENCE.
FOR REAL-LIFE BROTHERS GQ AND
JQ, HIP-HOP IS MORE THAN A MUSIC
STYLE; IT'S A WAY OF LIFE.
>> IF I GO TO A WORKOUT CLASS, I
WOULD RATHER IT BE IN RHYME.
I WANT EVERYTHING IN LIFE TO
RHYME.
ORDERING A SANDWICH, EVERYTHING,
I WANT TO BE IN RHYME.
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: THE ONLY
SHAKESPEARE PLAY FEATURING A
BLACK PROTAGONIST, "OTHELLO"
TELLS THE STORY OF A MILITARY
GENERAL WHO BECOMES CONVINCED BY
HIS RESENTFUL UNDERLING IAGO
THAT HIS WIFE IS CHEATING ON
HIM.
THE Q BROTHERS' PRODUCTION
TRANSFORMS OTHELLO INTO A RISING
HIP-HOP STAR AND IAGO INTO A
JEALOUS MEMBER OF HIS ENTOURAGE.
>> ♪ OTHELLO'S RICH
BUT HE KEEPS ME POOR
♪ AH, WELL, NOW IT'S TIME
TO SETTLE THE SCORE
♪ HEY, HE NEVER LETS ME
GET MY FOOT IN THE DOOR
♪ AND THIS IS WHY
I HATE THE MOOR.
>> Reporter: GQ PLAYS IAGO.
WHAT DO YOU THINK HIP-HOP BRINGS
OUT OF SHAKESPEARE THAT JUST A
STRAIGHT PERFORMANCE WOULDN'T?
>> IF YOU BOIL SHAKESPEARE DOWN
AND YOU BOIL HIP-HOP DOWN TO
WHAT'S LEFT IN THE POT, THE
ESSENCE, THE GRIT IS
STORYTELLING THROUGH POETRY AND
MUSICAL LANGUAGE.
THAT'S IT.
THAT'S ALL YOU HAVE.
WHEN YOU BRING IT TO A BASIC
LEVEL, THAT'S WHAT SHAKESPEARE
IS; THAT'S WHAT THE BEST HIP-HOP
ARTISTS ARE DOING.
>> Reporter: THIS ISN'T THE
FIRST TIME THE Q BROTHERS HAVE
FUSED HIP-HOP WITH SHAKESPEARE.
17 YEARS AGO, THEY CREATED AND
CO-STARRED IN "THE BOMB-ITTY OF
ERRORS," BASED ON THE BARD'S
"COMEDY OF ERRORS."
THEY'VE BEEN PERFORMING HIP-HOP
ADAPTATIONS OF SHAKESPEARE EVER
SINCE.
>> WHAT SHAKESPEARE WAS DOING IS
EXACTLY WHAT WE WERE DOING, AND
WE REALIZED THAT EARLY ON.
LIKE, HE TOOK THE GREEKS AND
HE REWROTE THEM.
AND WE REALIZED, "OH, WE'RE JUST
TAKING THE CLASSICS FROM OUR DAY
AND REWRITING THEM, TOO."
SO, I THINK HE'D BE A PROPONENT
OF WHAT WE DO.
>> ♪ O TO THE T-H-E DOUBLE-L O
THEY STICK WITH THE SWELL,
FLOW LIKE IT'S VELCRO
♪ CLASSIC AS A SHELL-TOE
SNEAKER ON A B-BOY
♪ TAKE A TRIP WITH THIS STAR
I'M LEONARD NIMOY.
>> Reporter: POSTELL PRINGLE
PLAYS THE SHOW'S TITLE
CHARACTER.
>> IT REQUIRES A CERTAIN LEVEL
OF PARTICIPATION BACK FROM THE
AUDIENCE.
WHEN WE TELL YOU TO, LIKE, GET
YOUR HANDS UP, LIKE, WE ARE
ACTUALLY SPEAKING TO YOU.
WE'RE TELLING YOU TO GET YOUR
HANDS UP, JUST LIKE YOU WOULD IN
ANY OTHER HIP-HOP CONCERT THAT
YOU WOULD GO TO.
>> Reporter: JACKSON DORAN PLAYS
OTHELLO'S RIGHT HAND MAN,
CASSIO.
>> I THINK WHAT WE PROVIDE IS
SOMETHING THAT PEOPLE CAN TUNE
INTO THAT MAKES MORE SENSE IN A
CONTEMPORARY CONTEXT.
AND ALSO, WE'RE DOING SOMETHING
THAT TRADITIONAL MUSICAL THEATRE
DOESN'T DO, WHICH IS WE RAP THE
ENTIRE THING FROM START TO
FINISH.
WE HAVE A DJ ONSTAGE.
WE'RE TRYING TO CHANGE THE GAME
A LITTLE BIT IN THE SENSE OF
TRYING TO DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT
WITH TRADITIONAL AMERICAN
MUSICAL THEATRE AND TRADITIONAL
SHAKESPEARE.
>> Reporter: PRINGLE BELIEVES
THE STORY OF OTHELLO'S RISE AND
FALL IS HEIGHTENED BY THE HIP-
HOP SETTING.
>> COMING FROM NOTHING AND
MAKING SOMETHING OUT OF
YOURSELF, THAT'S THE STORY OF
HIP-HOP ALL IN ITSELF.
MAKING SOMETHING FROM NOTHING,
THAT'S WHAT THIS CHARACTER DOES.
WHEN SOMEBODY STARTS TO CORRODE
THAT, THEN YOU GET TO PLAY WITH
THE JEALOUSY AND THE PARANOIA.
AS AN ACTOR, YOU DREAM FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO, LIKE, PLAY THAT
SCALE OF EMOTION.
AND THEN, TO GET TO THE POINT
WHERE YOU GET... WHERE YOU
DESCEND INTO RAGE, WHICH, I
DON'T KNOW, SPEAKING SOMEWHAT
PERSONALLY, LIKE, IS SOMETHING
VERY CATHARTIC AS A BLACK MAN IN
AMERICA.
>> Reporter: ALTHOUGH RACE ISN'T
A PROMINENT FEATURE IN "OTHELLO:
THE REMIX," THE SHOW EXPLORES
THE IDEA OF BEING AN OUTSIDER IN
SOCIETY, ESPECIALLY IN THE
SHOW'S FINAL SONG.
>> ♪ IN A COLD, DARK AND
UNFORGIVING SYSTEM WE STRUGGLE
WITH OUR DESTINY
♪ WHEN THE WORLD IS CRUMBLING,
EMERGE FROM THE RUBBLE, AND YOUR
LOVE IS GONNA SET YOU FREE
♪ I'M AN EXTRATERRESTRIAL
WATCHING THE WORLD SPIN
♪ WHAT AM I SUPPOSED TO DO?
FEEL LIKE I'M ON THE OUTSIDE
LOOKING IN.
>> Reporter: FOR THE Q BROTHERS,
WHO ARE PART INDIAN, THE SONG
EXEMPLIFIES THEIR OWN PERSONAL
EXPERIENCES GROWING UP AS PEOPLE
OF COLOR ON CHICAGO'S NORTHWEST
SIDE.
>> LIKE, WE CREATE THIS STUFF ON
STAGE, BUT IT'S ALL A
REPRESENTATION FOR OUR LIVES.
WE WERE BORN AND RAISED AS
ALIENS IN A WORLD, LIKE, ON THE
NORTH SIDE OF CHICAGO WHERE OUR
DAD WAS THE DARKEST GUY FOR
MILES AND MILES AROUND.
LIKE, WE WERE CAMEL JOCKEYS AND
DOT HEADS.
WE DON'T LOOK LIKE IT, BUT,
ACTUALLY, THAT'S WHAT WE WERE
CALLED MANY TIMES.
I'M FIGURING THIS OUT AS WE...
AS WE DO THAT LAST, FINAL SONG
TO EVERYONE IN THE AUDIENCE.
WE LOOK EVERYONE IN THE EYE AS
MUCH AS WE CAN UNTIL THE FINAL
PHRASE.
AND THEN, WE LOOK UP.
BUT EVERY TIME I SAY IT, I FIND
SOMETHING NEW AND DIFFERENT
ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: THE Q BROTHERS AND
THEIR CAST MATES ARE HOPEFUL
THAT IN A YEAR FULL OF TENSIONS
AND DIVISIONS, THEIR TAKE ON
"OTHELLO" CAN BRING AUDIENCES OF
ALL DIFFERENT BACKGROUNDS CLOSER
IN THEIR EXPERIENCE OF THE SHOW.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
FIND WAYS TO CONNECT WITH PEOPLE
WHO MAY NOT LOOK OR SEEM LIKE
YOU, ALWAYS.
AND YOU LOOK AT OUR CAST AND YOU
GOT TWO BROWN KIDS, A BLACK KID
AND A WHITE KID.
IT'S LIKE IF WE ALL THINK IT'S
FUNNY, YOU'RE ALL PROBABLY GOING
TO THINK IT'S FUNNY, YOU KNOW,
OR GOOD, OR INTERESTING OR
WHATEVER THE ADJECTIVE YOU WANT
TO PUT ON IT.
>> ♪ AND I MADE IT TO THE TOP
NO, WE'RE NEVER GONNA STOP
♪ WE AIN'T GONNA STOP
YEAH, WE'LL ALWAYS BE AROUND.
>> Sreenivasan: AS AMERICA'S
YOUNG POPULATION CONTINUES ITS
MOVE BACK TO URBAN CENTERS, VERY
FEW CITIES ARE ABLE TO AVOID THE
COMPLICATED CONVERSATION
SURROUNDING GENTRIFICATION.
WHETHER PUNCTUATED BY THE
ARRIVAL OF A NEW ORGANIC GROCERY
STORE OR EVEN A BOUTIQUE MEN'S
BARBER, DEVELOPMENT BRINGS
CHANGE AND OFTEN TENSION.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER REPORTS ON AN UNLIKELY
TALE OF GENTRIFICATION TAKING
PLACE UNDERNEATH ONE OF PORTLAND
OREGON'S OLDEST BRIDGES.
>> Reporter: UNDERNEATH
PORTLAND, OREGON'S BURNSIDE
BRIDGE IS ONE OF THE NATION'S
MECCAS FOR SKATEBOARDING.
WHAT STARTED 26 YEARS AGO, THIS
"DO IT YOURSELF" CONCRETE
SKATEPARK HAS BECOME PART OF THE
PORTLAND LORE.
IT'S INCLUDED IN MANY PORTLAND
TRAVEL GUIDES, REGULARLY APPEARS
IN ADVERTISEMENTS AND WAS
FEATURED IN A BEST-SELLING VIDEO
GAME FRANCHISE.
>> THE FIRST LITTLE BIT OF
CONCRETE WAS POURED ON HALLOWEEN
1990.
>> Reporter: BURKE MORRIS SITS
ON THE BURNSIDE SKATEPARK'S
BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
>> BURNSIDE IS THE BIRTH OF THE
D.I.Y. SKATEPARK MOVEMENT.
SINCE ALL THE SKATEPARKS IN THE
'70s CLOSED DOWN, ALMOST ALL OF
THEM, THERE WAS A REBIRTH IN THE
'90s LARGELY DUE TO HERE.
>> Reporter: ALL OF THIS STARTED
WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE, SANCTION OR
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
CITY.
AND THAT VERY FIRST POUR WAS...
WAS WHERE?
>> JUST THE BACK WALL BACK
THERE.
TWO LITTLE... ONE LITTLE PIECE,
AND THEN ANOTHER LITTLE PIECE.
THEN ON FROM THERE.
>> Reporter: IT'S EVOLVED
INTO... TO THIS.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: WHILE BURNSIDE GREW
OUT OF A LONG NEGLECTED CORNER
OF PORTLAND, IN A CITY
UNDERGOING RAPID TRANSFORMATION,
WHAT HAS BECOME A SUBCULTURE
CORNERSTONE IS UNDER PRESSURE.
WE HEAR THIS ALL THE TIME IN
BROOKLYN.
WE HEAR ABOUT IT IN AUSTIN AND
PLACES LIKE THAT, PLACES THAT
HAVE REAL UNIQUE IDENTITIES AND
SPACES.
>> WELL, IT'S KIND OF A WEIRD
SITUATION.
SPACES LIKE BURNSIDE AND SPACES
MADE BY THE ARTISTIC CREATIVE
COMMUNITY ARE OFTEN THE
FOREFRONT, THE FIRST STEP OF
GENTRIFICATION.
AND I PERSONALLY AM VERY AWARE
OF THAT.
I SEE THAT BURNSIDE CAME INTO
THE NEIGHBORHOOD, CLEANED IT UP,
BUT IT REMAINED AN INDUSTRIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD UP UNTIL RECENTLY.
AND THAT'S ABOUT TO CHANGE,
ALONG WITH MUCH OF PORTLAND.
WE'RE JUST TRYING TO HOLD ONTO
WHAT WE HAVE AT THIS POINT.
>> Reporter: NOW LOOMING ABOVE
GRITTY BURNSIDE, A SLEEK, NEW
MODERN LIVING SPACE AND A SIGN
OF A CHANGING CITY.
KNOWN SIMPLY AS "YARD," THE 284
LUXURY APARTMENT RENTALS ARE
ADVERTISED AS A PLACE WHERE
FRIENDS GATHER TO UNWIND,
EXCHANGE IDEAS AND MAKE NEW
CONNECTIONS.
THERE IS PARKING FOR ELECTRIC
CARS, ITS FITTED WITH AN ECO-
FRIENDLY ROOF AND EACH APARTMENT
WILL HAVE A BIKE RACK.
BUT DEVELOPER JEFF PICKHARDT
SAYS THE PLAN FOR THIS NEW
LIVING SPACE ALWAYS ENVISIONED A
PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE WITH
BURNSIDE.
>> SO, WHEN WE BOUGHT THE LOT,
WE HAD TO HAVE A CONVERSATION
ABOUT SCALING THE SKATE PARK
BACK.
AND THEN, WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE
BUILDING GOES UP AND HOW DO WE
PHASE THE SKATE PARK BACK IN?
SO, INITIALLY, A BIT
CONTENTIOUS.
WE WANTED TO TREAD LIGHTLY ON
THE WORK THAT THEY HAD DONE.
YOU KNOW, THEY'VE BEEN HERE FOR
25 YEARS, AND WE'RE THE NEW GUYS
ON THE BLOCK.
I MEAN, 25 YEARS AGO, IMAGINE
THIS PLACE.
IT WAS... IT WAS BLIGHTED 25
MONTHSAGO.
>> Reporter: THE MIXED USE
RESIDENTIAL TOWER IS ANOTHER
TURN IN PORTLAND'S MOVE FROM ITS
INDUSTRIAL PAST TO 21st CENTURY
HIPSTER HAVEN, ANOTHER CHAPTER
IN THIS CITY'S REDEVELOPMENT.
DURING THE PAST THREE YEARS,
UNITED VAN LINES REPORTS MOVING
MORE PEOPLE TO OREGON THAN ANY
OTHER STATE IN THE COUNTRY.
AT THE SAME TIME, PORTLAND RENTS
HAVE BEEN EXPERIENCING THE
HIGHEST PERCENTAGE GROWTH AMONG
THE NATION'S TOP 50 HOUSING
MARKETS.
PEOPLE ARE MOVING HERE EN MASSE.
THERE ARE CRANES IN THE SKY
EVERYWHERE.
WHERE DOES THIS LITTLE TINY BIT
OF REAL ESTATE FIT WITHIN WHAT'S
HAPPENING HERE?
>> YEAH, I THINK THE INTEREST IN
PORTLAND RIGHT NOW IS THE
AUTHENTICITY.
AND I THINK THE SKATE PARK IS
AUTHENTICITY SORT OF AT THE MAX.
AND FOR PEOPLE TO COME IN AND DO
THIS WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT
ORIGINALLY AND CREATE WHAT
THEY'VE CREATED AND HAVE IT
STAND THE TEST OF TIME, IT SAYS
A LOT.
AND IT SAYS A LOT ABOUT A
COMMUNITY THAT'S WILLING TO GO
ALONG WITH THAT, TOO.
>> Reporter: WITH THE ARRIVAL OF
YARD, BURNSIDE DID NOT LOSE ANY
SQUARE FOOTAGE OF THE SKATEPARK,
BUT THEY DID LOSE SOME SUNLIGHT.
IN RETURN, THE DEVELOPER AGREED
TO INSTALL LIGHTS IN THE PARK TO
COMPENSATE FOR THE LIGHT LOST BY
THE HIGH-RISE.
>> JEFF HAS WORKED WITH US TO A
LARGE DEGREE, AND WE'RE THANKFUL
OF THAT.
IT COULD BE A LOT WORSE.
THAT BEING SAID, I'M STILL...
NOTHING'S SET IN CONCRETE-- IF
YOU FORGIVE THE PUN-- UNTIL IT'S
THERE, YOU KNOW?
SO...
>> Reporter: JEFF SAID HE THINKS
YOU GUYS, WHAT YOU HAVE BUILT IS
FAR MORE CULTURALLY IMPORTANT
THAN A BUILDING.
DO YOU AGREE WITH THAT?
>> OH, YEAH.
I APPRECIATE HIM SAYING THAT.
I... THIS... I CAN'T REALLY...
IT'S HARD TO CONVEY THE
IMPORTANCE OF BURNSIDE TO ANYONE
IN THE NON-SKATEBOARD WORLD, BUT
IT'S INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
WORLDWIDE.
>> Reporter: AND YOU DID IT
YOURSELVES?
>> YEAH, AND IT'S OUR SPOT.
WE CONTINUE TO BUILD.
>> Reporter: TENANTS BEGAN
MOVING INTO YARD THIS PAST JULY,
AND SOON AFTER A SPA AND
WELLNESS CLUB OPENED ITS DOORS.
ACCORDING TO THE BUILDING, A
RESTAURANT IS SET TO OPEN NEXT
YEAR, SELLING A NEW "BURNSIDE
BURGER," OF WHICH PARTIAL
PROCEEDS WILL TO GO TO THE
SKATEPARK.
>> Sreenivasan: SOUTH DAKOTA IS
A RURAL STATE THAT IS MORE THAN
85% WHITE, WITH ONLY SMALL
PERCENTAGES OF NATIVE AMERICAN,
BLACK, LATINO AND ASIAN
RESIDENTS.
HOWEVER, THE DEMOGRAPHICS IN
SOME TOWNS ARE CHANGING DUE TO A
NEW WAVE OF IMMIGRATION, WITH
CONSEQUENCES FOR LOCAL
ECONOMIES.
ONCE AGAIN, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S
CHRISTOPHER BOOKER REPORTS IN
THIS STORY WE FIRST BROUGHT YOU
IN JULY.
>> Reporter: AT DAKOTA
PROVISIONS, A TURKEY PROCESSING
PLANT IN HURON, SOUTH DAKOTA,
WORKER NYO MAUNG TAKES ONLY A
SECOND AND A HALF TO REMOVE THE
TAIL OF A TURKEY.
WITH HIS ELECTRIC KNIFE, HE
COMPLETES 40 CUTS A MINUTE AND
2,400 EVERY HOUR.
HURON IS A SMALL CITY OF 13,000
RESIDENTS HALFWAY BETWEEN SIOUX
FALLS AND THE STATE CAPITAL,
PIERRE.
MORE THAN 40 TURKEY FARMS SUPPLY
THE PLANT, WHICH DISTRIBUTES
MEAT ALL OVER THE U.S.
IT RUNS LIKE AN AUTO FACTORY
ASSEMBLY LINE, WITH ABOUT A
THOUSAND WORKERS PROCESSING
20,000 TURKEYS A DAY.
THAT ADDS UP TO 200 MILLION
POUNDS OF TURKEY MEAT A YEAR.
AND NO ONE IS FASTER WITH HIS
BLADE THAN NYO MAUNG.
MARK "SMOKEY" HEUSTON IS THE
COMPANY'S HUMAN RESOURCES
DIRECTOR.
THE FOREMAN WAS SAYING THAT
THEY'VE ACTUALLY NOTICED WHEN
HE'S ON VACATION THAT THE
PRODUCTIVITY LEVELS GO DOWN, THE
YIELDS GO DOWN.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
>> Reporter: ON AVERAGE, FLOOR
WORKERS LIKE NYO MAUNG MAKE
AROUND $13 AN HOUR.
SINCE THE PLANT OPENED IN 2005,
IT'S BEEN A CONSTANT STRUGGLE TO
FIND AND RETAIN ENOUGH PEOPLE
FROM SOUTH DAKOTA WILLING TO
WORK IN MEATPACKING.
IMMIGRANTS HELP FILL THE GAP.
>> WE'RE ABLE TO KEEP OUR
TURNOVER DOWN TO THE 15% AND 20%
A YEAR RANGE, WHICH IS FOUR OR
FIVE TIMES LESS THAN THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE FOR THE
MEATPACKING PLANTS.
>> Reporter: LIKE NYO MAUNG,
MOST WORKERS HERE ARE KAREN, AN
ETHNIC MINORITY FROM MYANMAR,
FORMERLY KNOWN AS BURMA.
BETWEEN 2005 AND 2014, A U.S.
RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM ADMITTED
73,000 REFUGEES FROM MYANMAR,
LONG GOVERNED BY A MILITARY
DICTATORSHIP UNTIL LAST YEAR.
HEUSTON BEGAN RECRUITING THE
REFUGEES IN 2007, WHEN, DURING A
TRIP TO ST. PAUL, MINNESOTA, A
MAGNET FOR REFUGEES FROM
MYANMAR, HE MET A SMALL GROUP OF
KAREN PEOPLE WILLING TO MOVE TO
HURON.
NINE YEARS LATER, THROUGH WORD
OF MOUTH AND FAMILY TIES, WHAT
STARTED WITH THREE HAS EXPANDED
TO MORE THAN 600 KAREN WORKERS.
>> WITHOUT THE KAREN PEOPLE, WE
PROBABLY WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
RUN THE TURKEY PLANT.
>> Reporter: WHY NOT?
>> PEOPLE JUST DON'T WANT TO
MOVE TO RURAL AMERICA.
THE LOCAL YOUNG PEOPLE ARE GOING
OUT TO SEE THE REST OF THE
WORLD.
THE KAREN PEOPLE HAVE SEEN THE
REST OF THE WORLD, AND THEY'VE
HAD ENOUGH OF THE REST OF THE
WORLD.
THE KAREN COME HERE FOR EXACTLY
THE SAME REASONS THAT OUR
ANCESTORS CAME HERE, AND THAT'S
TO BE FREE.
>> Reporter: NYO MAUNG ARRIVED
HERE IN 2012.
WHY DID YOU DECIDE TO MOVE TO
HURON AS OPPOSED TO ST. PAUL OR
INDIANA OR ANOTHER PLACE IN THE
UNITED STATES?
WHY HURON?
>> (translated): THE REASON
THAT I CHOSE HURON IS BECAUSE MY
RELATIVES LIVE HERE.
ONE OF MY RELATIVES OR SIBLINGS,
THEY ARRIVED HERE BEFORE.
>> Reporter: BUT THE KAREN ARE
ONLY PART OF THE STORY.
ROUGHLY 16% OF THE PLANT'S
WORKFORCE IS FROM LATIN AMERICA.
THE PLANT'S DIVERSITY HAS
TRANSFORMED HURON AND
SURROUNDING BEADLE COUNTY,
BRINGING THE CITY'S POPULATION
BACK UP TO NUMBERS NOT SEEN
SINCE 1980 WHILE REDUCING THE
MEDIAN AGE BY FIVE YEARS.
>> WE WERE MAYBE ONE OF THE
PIONEERS IN OUR AREA TO EMBRACE
SOME OF THE IMMIGRATION.
>> Reporter: BROOKE SYDOW IS
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
COORDINATOR FOR THE CITY OF
HURON.
>> WE WANT TO SEE SOUTH DAKOTA
GROW, AND WE'RE NOT SEEING THE
TRADITIONAL WHITE MIDDLE-CLASS
AMERICAN COME BACK TO A RURAL
PLACE.
IT'S JUST NOT HAPPENING.
AND SO, WE'RE EMBRACING
WHATEVER'S COMING OUR WAY VERSUS
TRYING TO BAR UP AND SAY, "WE
CAN'T HELP YOU."
LET'S SAY, "OKAY, COME HERE.
HOWCAN WE HELP YOU?"
>> Reporter: WITH 46% OF THE K-
12 STUDENTS BEING OF ASIAN OR
LATINO DESCENT, "HELPING" MEANS
EXPANDING THE SCHOOL'S ENGLISH
AS A SECOND LANGUAGE PROGRAM AND
HIRING A CERTIFIED E.S.L.
INSTRUCTOR FOR EVERY GRADE.
THEY ALSO ADDED MORE PLOTS TO
THIS COMMUNITY GARDEN,
BELIEVING THE SPACE WOULD ALLOW
NEW AND OLD RESIDENTS TO GET TO
KNOW ONE ANOTHER.
AND THE CITY ALSO HELPS NEW
ARRIVALS WITH HOUSING NEEDS.
WITH THE HELP OF HURON'S JAMES
VALLEY HOUSING GROUP AND THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM, NYO
MAUNG WAS ABLE TO BUY THIS
$137,000 FOUR-BEDROOM HOUSE WITH
NO MONEY DOWN.
YOU HAVE DECIDED TO STAY IN
HURON?
>> (translated): FOREVER,
ALWAYS.
THE REST OF MY LIFE, I WILL NOT
GO TO ANY OTHER PLACES.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE ELSE TO GO.
I'LL STAY HERE.
>> WE'VE ALWAYS BEEN A WORKING-
CLASS COMMUNITY, AND THERE'S
ALWAYS BEEN DIFFERENT GROUPS OF
PEOPLE THAT HAVE COME THROUGH
AND KIND OF LIVED AND WORKED IN
THE COMMUNITY.
AND WITH THE KAREN POPULATION,
THEY FIT IN REALLY WELL WITHIN
OUR COMMUNITY.
WE HAVE A HUGE FAMILY-BASED
ORIENTATION.
THEY'RE FAMILY-BASED, WE'RE
FAMILY-BASED, SO IT'S BEEN A
GOOD FIT.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THERE
WERE SOME MINOR CULTURE CLASHES
AT FIRST-- MARK HEUSTON TELLS A
STORY ABOUT A KAREN FAMILY
RAISING A FEW EYEBROWS AFTER
THEY STARTED LAYING FISH OUT TO
DRY IN THEIR NEIGHBOR'S BACK-
YARD-- SYDOW SAYS THE TOWN IS
MORE THAN WILLING TO DO WHAT IS
NEEDED TO MAKE IMMIGRANTS FEEL
WELCOME.
>> IF THAT MEANS PUTTING UP
ANOTHER RESTAURANT, OR IF THAT
MEANS CHANGING THE E.S.L.
PROGRAM OR TRYING TO HELP WITH
COMMUNITY INTEGRATION, THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO DO.
>> Reporter: YOU GUYS ARE OPEN
FOR BUSINESS?
>> WE'RE OPEN FOR BUSINESS, AND
THAT'S WHAT SETS US APART FROM
OTHER COMMUNITIES.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: OVER THE LAST
FEW DECADES, AN INVASIVE CRAB
NATIVE TO EUROPE HAS BEEN MAKING
IT'S WAY UP THE WEST COAST OF
THE UNITED STATES.
AS KATIE CAMPBELL OF SEATTLE PBS
STATION KCTS 9 AND THE
ENVIRONMENTAL JOURNALISM
COLLABORATION EARTHFIX REPORTS,
THERE IS AN EFFORT TO SEE JUST
HOW MANY OF THESE INVADERS ARE
LURKING IN THE WATER.
>> Reporter: EMILY GRASON AND
SEAN McDONALD ARE ON A HUNT.
THEY'RE SCOURING THIS SALT MARSH
ON SAN JUAN ISLAND IN PUGET
SOUND, IN SEARCH OF A THREE-INCH
MENACE-- THE EUROPEAN GREEN
CRAB.
>> THIS WAS THE LOCATION WHERE
OUR VOLUNTEER CREW FOUND A
SINGLE ADULT MALE, AND THIS IS
THE FIRST SIGHTING ALONG
WASHINGTON'S INLAND SHORES.
>> Reporter: THEY'VE SET
HUNDREDS OF BAITED TRAPS TO TRY
TO PREVENT INVASIVE GREEN CRABS
FROM SETTING UP A COLONY.
>> IT MIGHT SEEM LIKE IT'S CRAZY
FOR US TO HAVE SUCH AN INTENSE
TRAPPING EFFORT FOR JUST A
SINGLE CRAB BEING FOUND, BUT
THESE CRABS DO TEND TO SHOW UP
IN NUMBERS.
AND WHERE THERE'S ONE, THERE'S
OFTEN MORE.
>> Reporter: GREEN CRABS ARE
CONSIDERED ONE OF THE WORST
GLOBAL INVADERS.
FROM THEIR HOME SHORES OF
EUROPE, GREEN CRABS HAVE SPREAD
TO SOUTH AFRICA, BRAZIL,
AUSTRALIA AND BOTH COASTS OF
NORTH AMERICA.
THEY ARE VORACIOUS PREDATORS,
ABLE TO CRACK OPEN MUSSELS AND
CRABS.
ON THE EAST COAST, THEIR NUMBERS
HAVE BEEN ON THE RISE.
THEY'VE WREAKED HAVOC ON THE
ECOSYSTEM AND DEVASTATED MAINE'S
SOFT-SHELL CLAM INDUSTRY.
>> THE ONLY EFFECTIVE TOOL WE
HAVE IS TRAPPING.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR THE TIME
BEING, THERE'S HOPE.
AFTER THREE DAYS, THEIR TRAPS
COME UP EMPTY.
>> NOW, I HAVE A LITTLE BIT MORE
CONFIDENCE THAT THERE IS NOT
TONS OF CRABS HIDING IN POCKETS
OF THIS MARSH.
>> THERE'S ALWAYS THAT VOICE IN
THE BACK OF YOUR HEAD GOING,
"DID YOU LOOK EVERYWHERE?"
THERE IS REALLY NO WAY TO KNOW.
>> Reporter: THEY'LL BE BACK IN
THE COMING MONTHS TO SEARCH SOME
MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A STATEMENT
RELEASED LATE TODAY BY
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP'S
TRANSITION TEAM, MR. TRUMP
ANNOUNCED THAT HE INTENDS TO
DISSOLVE THE DONALD J. TRUMP
FOUNDATION.
MR. TRUMP SAID THAT WHILE THE
FOUNDATION HAS DONE WHAT HE
CALLS "ENORMOUS GOOD WORKS OVER
THE YEARS," HE WAS ACTING TO
"AVOID EVEN THE APPEARANCE OF
ANY CONFLICT WITH MY ROLE AS
PRESIDENT."
THE FOUNDATION HAS BEEN
CONTROVERSIAL AND IS CURRENTLY
UNDER INVESTIGATION BY THE NEW
YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
IN 2015, THE FOUNDATION HAD NET
ASSETS OF JUST OVER
$1.1 MILLION.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.